---
title: facil.io - 0.8.x Core IO Library Documentation
sidebar: 0.8.x/_sidebar.md
---
# facil.io - 0.8.x Core IO Library Documentation

## Lower Level API Notice

>> **The core IO library is probably not the API most developers need to focus on** (although it's always good to know).
>>
>> This API is used to power the higher level API offered by the [HTTP / WebSockts extension](./http) and the [dynamic FIOBJ types](./fiobj).

## Overview

The core IO library follows an evented design and uses callbacks for IO events. Using the API described in the [Connection Management section](#connection-protocol-management):

- Each connection / socket, is identified by a process unique number (`uuid`).

- Connections are assigned protocol objects (`fio_protocol_s`) using the `fio_attach` function.

- The callbacks in the protocol object are called whenever an IO event occurs.

- Callbacks are protected using one of two connection bound locks - `FIO_PR_LOCK_TASK` for most tasks and `FIO_PR_LOCK_WRITE` for `on_ready` and `on_timeout` tasks.

   This makes it easy to handle multi-threading. Connection data that is mutated only by the connection itself and within the same type of protected tasks, is safe from corruption.

- User data is assumed to be stored in the protocol object using C style inheritance.

   This approach improves performance by avoiding a `udata` pointer where possible. This saves a layer of redirection that often results in increased CPU cache misses.

   The most convenient approach would [place the `fio_protocol_s` object as the first element in a larger `struct`](https://github.com/boazsegev/facil.io/blob/d4ee13109736e6df7548744ab05efeb9aa645614/examples/raw-http.c#L55-L56) and simply [type-cast  the larger `struct`'s pointer](https://github.com/boazsegev/facil.io/blob/d4ee13109736e6df7548744ab05efeb9aa645614/examples/raw-http.c#L264-L266).

[Reading and writing operations](#reading-writing) use an internal user-land buffer and they never fail... unless, the client is so slow that they appear to be attacking the network layer (slowloris) the connection was lost due to other reasons or the system is out of memory.

Because the framework is evented, there's API that offers easy [event and task scheduling](#event-task-scheduling), including timers etc'. Also, connection events can be rescheduled, allowing connections to behave like state-machines.

The core library includes [Pub/Sub (publish / subscribe) services](pub-sub-services) which offer easy IPC (inter process communication) in a network friendly API. Pub/Sub services can be extended to synchronize with external databases such as Redis.

## Examples

The `tests` folder contains example code as well as code used for testing. This is true for the [C STL library](https://github.com/facil-io/cstl/tree/master/tests), the IO core library and the extensions a well.

## Required files

The core IO library functions are declared at `fio.h` header and defined in the `fio.c` implementation file. The core IO library requires the `fio-stl.h` header.

The headers should be well documented and the code is usually easy to read. I also do my best to keep this documentation up to date.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
